docs/development.md, before:

# Developing envctl

This document provides guidelines and information for developers contributing to the envctl project.

## Prerequisites

*   Go 1.21+
*   Make
*   Docker (for `act` testing)
*   [act](https://github.com/nektos/act#installation) (optional, for local workflow testing)
*   Python 3+ & pip (for `yamllint`)
*   `yamllint` (`pip install yamllint`)
*   `golangci-lint` (can be installed via the CI workflow or locally: [Install Instructions](https://golangci-lint.run/usage/install/#local-installation))

## Development Setup

1. Clone the repository:
   ```zsh
   git clone https://github.com/giantswarm/envctl.git
   cd envctl
   ```

2. Install Go dependencies:
   ```zsh
   go mod download
   ```

3. Build the binary:
   ```zsh
   make build
   ```

4. Install locally for testing:
   ```zsh
   make install
   ```

## Linting and Testing Strategy

*   **Go Linting:** Handled by CircleCI (not run in this repository's GitHub Actions workflows).
*   **YAML Linting:** Performed using `yamllint`. Run locally using `make lint-yaml` or `make check` (which is also run in the CI workflow).
*   **Go Unit Tests:** Not currently run via Make targets or the GitHub Actions workflows in this repository. They should be run manually (`go test ./...`) or handled by a separate CI/CD process if configured (e.g., CircleCI).
*   **Release Dry-Run:** The GoReleaser configuration and build process can be tested using `make release-dry-run`. This is also run automatically in the CI workflow for pull requests.

## Automated Release Process

The envctl project uses GitHub Actions to automatically create releases when pull requests are merged to the main branch. Here's how it works:

1. When a PR is merged to `main`, the `.github/workflows/auto-release.yaml` GitHub Action workflow is triggered.
2. The workflow:
   * Gets the latest version tag (defaulting to v0.0.0).
   * Creates a new version by incrementing the patch number (e.g., v0.1.0 -> v0.1.1).
   * Generates a changelog entry based on the merged PR title, number, and author.
   * Updates the `CHANGELOG.md` file by adding the entry under the `[Unreleased]` section (creating the file or section if needed).
   * Commits and pushes the `CHANGELOG.md` changes back to the `main` branch.
   * Creates and pushes a new git tag corresponding to the new version.
   * Uses GoReleaser (`goreleaser release --clean`) to build binaries for Linux, macOS, and Windows (amd64 and arm64), create archives (.tar.gz/.zip), generate a checksum file, and finally create a GitHub Release attaching the archives, checksums, and individual binaries.

## Testing the Release Process

You can test parts of the release process locally using the following commands:

```zsh
# Test the GoReleaser build/archive/checksum steps without publishing
make release-dry-run

# Create a full release locally (builds, archives, checksums, GitHub release)
# Requires a GITHUB_TOKEN environment variable with repo scope.
# Note: This creates a real release and should generally only be used by maintainers for specific testing.
make release-local
```

### Testing the GitHub Actions Workflows Locally with `act`

You can use [`act`](https://github.com/nektos/act#installation) to simulate the GitHub Actions workflows locally. This requires Docker.

1. **Test the CI Workflow (Pull Request Event):**
   ```zsh
   # This simulates the checks run on a PR
   act pull_request --job check
   ```

2. **Test the CI Workflow (Push Event):**
   ```zsh
   # This simulates the checks run on a push to main
   act push --job check
   ```

3. **Test the Auto-Release Workflow:**
   This workflow requires a specific event payload (`pull_request` with `action: closed` and `merged: true`).
   * Create a sample event file (e.g., `merged_pr_event.json`) with the structure found [here](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/events-that-trigger-workflows#pull_request) (ensure `.pull_request.merged` is `true`, and populate fields like `.pull_request.title`, `.pull_request.number`, `.pull_request.html_url`, `.pull_request.user.login`).
   * Run `act`:
       ```zsh
       act pull_request --job auto_release --eventpath merged_pr_event.json
       ```
   * **Note:** The steps involving `git push` (updating CHANGELOG.md, pushing the tag) will likely fail in `act` because the container doesn't have credentials configured for your repository. This is expected. Verify the steps *before* the push attempts complete successfully.

## Contributing

1. Create a new branch for your changes:
   ```zsh
   git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
   ```

2. Make your changes and commit them with meaningful commit messages.

3. Ensure your changes pass local checks (e.g., `make check`). Run Go linters and unit tests separately if they are not covered by other CI.

4. Push your branch and create a pull request targeting the `main` branch.

5. The CI workflow (`ci.yaml`) will run YAML linting checks (`make check`) and a GoReleaser dry-run on your PR.

6. Once your PR is approved and merged, the auto-release workflow will run and create a new release.

## Version Management

The version number follows Semantic Versioning (MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH).

* The automated release process currently **only increments the PATCH version** for each merged PR.
* For **MINOR** or **MAJOR** version bumps, manual intervention is currently required after merging the relevant feature/breaking change PRs:
  1. Create and push the desired tag manually (e.g., `git tag v1.0.0`, `git push origin v1.0.0`).
  2. Manually trigger the `auto-release.yaml` workflow via the GitHub Actions UI, selecting the `main` branch and providing the manually created tag.
  *Alternatively, adjust the `Determine Next Version` step in `auto-release.yaml` temporarily before merging the PR that should trigger the bump, or create a separate release PR.*

Commit message:

refactor: Remove CHANGELOG.md update step and switch to GitHub native release notes (#9)
Eliminate the manual update process for CHANGELOG.md and switch to using GitHub's native release notes feature for automatic changelog generation during releases. This streamlines the release process and reduces maintenance overhead.

The main reason is that auto-release can't update the main branch with the CHANGELOG.md. So only goreleaser is creating the changelog and putting this into the releases.

docs/development.md, after:

# Developing envctl

This document provides guidelines and information for developers contributing to the envctl project.

## Prerequisites

*   Go 1.21+
*   Make
*   Docker (for `act` testing)
*   [act](https://github.com/nektos/act#installation) (optional, for local workflow testing)
*   Python 3+ & pip (for `yamllint`)
*   `yamllint` (`pip install yamllint`)
*   `golangci-lint` (can be installed via the CI workflow or locally: [Install Instructions](https://golangci-lint.run/usage/install/#local-installation))

## Development Setup

1. Clone the repository:
   ```zsh
   git clone https://github.com/giantswarm/envctl.git
   cd envctl
   ```

2. Install Go dependencies:
   ```zsh
   go mod download
   ```

3. Build the binary:
   ```zsh
   make build
   ```

4. Install locally for testing:
   ```zsh
   make install
   ```

## Linting and Testing Strategy

*   **Go Linting:** Handled by CircleCI (not run in this repository's GitHub Actions workflows).
*   **YAML Linting:** Performed using `yamllint`. Run locally using `make lint-yaml` or `make check` (which is also run in the CI workflow).
*   **Go Unit Tests:** Not currently run via Make targets or the GitHub Actions workflows in this repository. They should be run manually (`go test ./...`) or handled by a separate CI/CD process if configured (e.g., CircleCI).
*   **Release Dry-Run:** The GoReleaser configuration and build process can be tested using `make release-dry-run`. This is also run automatically in the CI workflow for pull requests.

## Automated Release Process

The envctl project uses GitHub Actions to automatically create releases when pull requests are merged to the main branch. Here's how it works:

1. When a PR is merged to `main`, the `.github/workflows/auto-release.yaml` GitHub Action workflow is triggered.
2. The workflow:
   * Gets the latest version tag (defaulting to v0.0.0).
   * Creates a new version by incrementing the patch number (e.g., v0.1.0 -> v0.1.1).
   * Creates and pushes a new git tag corresponding to the new version.
   * Uses GoReleaser (`goreleaser release --clean`) to build binaries, create archives, generate checksums, and create a GitHub Release.
   * The release notes (changelog) are automatically generated by GoReleaser using GitHub's API based on merged PRs since the last tag (`changelog.use: github-native`).

## Testing the Release Process

You can test parts of the release process locally using the following commands:

```zsh
# Test the GoReleaser build/archive/checksum steps without publishing
make release-dry-run

# Create a full release locally (builds, archives, checksums, GitHub release)
# Requires a GITHUB_TOKEN environment variable with repo scope.
# Note: This creates a real release and should generally only be used by maintainers for specific testing.
make release-local
```

### Testing the GitHub Actions Workflows Locally with `act`

You can use [`act`](https://github.com/nektos/act#installation) to simulate the GitHub Actions workflows locally. This requires Docker. Use the following `make` targets:

1. **Test the CI Workflow (Pull Request Event):**
   ```zsh
   # This simulates the checks run on a PR (yamllint, goreleaser dry-run)
   make test-ci-pr
   ```

2. **Test the CI Workflow (Push Event):**
   ```zsh
   # This simulates the checks run on a push to main (yamllint)
   make test-ci-push
   ```

3. **Test the Auto-Release Workflow:**
   ```zsh
   # This simulates the full release process
   make test-auto-release
   ```
   * **Note:** Requires `merged_pr_event.json` in the project root. You can create one based on the [GitHub pull_request event docs](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/events-that-trigger-workflows#pull_request) (ensure `.pull_request.merged` is `true`).
   * **Note:** The step involving `git push` for the tag might fail locally if the tag already exists or due to credential issues. You also won't see the GitHub Release creation locally.

## Contributing

1. Create a new branch for your changes:
   ```zsh
   git checkout -b feature/your-feature-name
   ```

2. Make your changes and commit them with meaningful commit messages.

3. Ensure your changes pass local checks (e.g., `make check`). Run Go linters and unit tests separately if they are not covered by other CI.

4. Push your branch and create a pull request targeting the `main` branch.

5. The CI workflow (`ci.yaml`) will run YAML linting checks (`make check`) and a GoReleaser dry-run on your PR.

6. Ensure your PR includes any necessary updates, but **do not manually update `CHANGELOG.md`**. The changelog will be generated automatically during the release.

7. Once your PR is approved and merged, the auto-release workflow will run and create a new release with generated notes.

## Version Management

The version number follows Semantic Versioning (MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH).

* The automated release process currently **only increments the PATCH version** for each merged PR.
* For **MINOR** or **MAJOR** version bumps, manual intervention is currently required after merging the relevant feature/breaking change PRs:
  1. Create and push the desired tag manually (e.g., `git tag v1.0.0`, `git push origin v1.0.0`).
  2. Manually trigger the `auto-release.yaml` workflow via the GitHub Actions UI, selecting the `main` branch and providing the manually created tag.
  *Alternatively, adjust the `Determine Next Version` step in `auto-release.yaml` temporarily before merging the PR that should trigger the bump, or create a separate release PR.*
